# [Installing a stage tarball](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Stage)
## Setting the date and time
Verify the current date and time by running the `date` command:
```bash
root # date
Web Feb 15 14:29:59 UTC 2023
```
* If the time is UTC don't worry about it, the timezone is configured later.  
If the date/time displayed is more than few minutes off, it should be updated in accuracy using one of the methods below.  
### Automatic
You can update the time automatically with `ntpd` command:
```bash
root # ntpd -q -g
```
### Manual
You can update the time manually with `date` command. You need to use following argument format: `MMDDhhmmYYYY` syntax (Month, Day, hour, minute and Year).  
For example,  to set the date to October 3rd, 13:16 in the year 2021, issue:
```bash
root # date 100313162021
```
## Choosing a stage tarball
### Multilib (32 and 64-bit)
Most users choose this one as it uses 64-bit libraries when possible, and only falls back to the 32-bit version when necessary for compatibility.  
### No-multilib (pure 64-bit)
You know if you need this and then check [Gentoo handbook](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Stage) for help.  
### Systemd
This guide will be using systemd.
## Downloading the stage tarball
First go to the Gentoo mount point where the root file system is mounted:
```bash
root # cd /mnt/gentoo
```
### Graphical browser
If you are using graphical environment with fully graphical web browser, you can copy the stage file URL from the main website's [download section](https://www.gentoo.org/downloads/#other-arches).  
```bash
root # wget <PASTED_STAGE_URL>
```
### Command-line browser
For command-line you can use `links` to download a stage file.
```bash
root # links https://www.gentoo.org/downloads/mirrors/
```
On the mirror list, select a mirror close by.  
Usually HTTP mirrors suffice, but other protocols are available as well.  
Move to the releases/amd64/autobuilds/ directory.   
There all available stage files are displayed (they might be stored within subdirectories named after the individual sub-architectures).  
Select one and press `d` to download.  
  
In this guide we will choose `stage3-amd64-systemd-20230212T161657Z.tar.xz`
  
Exit by pressin `ESC` and choosing `file` and then `exit`.  
  
## Unpacking the stage tarball
Now unpack the downloaded stage onto the system. Use the `tar` utility to proceed:
```bash
root # tar xpvf stage3-*.tar.xz --xattrs-include='*.*' --numeric-owner
```
  
## Configuring compile options
To optimize the system, it is possible to set variables which impact the behavior of Portage, Gentoo's officially supported package manager.  
Portage reads in the make.conf file when it runs, which will change runtime behavior depending on the values saved in the file.  
`make.conf` can be considered the primary configuration file for Portage, so treat its content carefully.  
  
Open `make.conf` in editor (this guide uses `nano`).
```bash
root # nano -w /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/make.conf
```
### CFLAGS and CXXFLAGS
More detailed explanations can be found in [Gentoo handbook](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Stage).  
A first setting is the -march= or -mtune= flag, which specifies the name of the target architecture.  
A commonly used value is native as that tells the compiler to select the target architecture of the current system (the one users are installing Gentoo on).  
```bash
# Compiler flags to set for all languages
COMMON_FLAGS="-march=native -O2 -pipe"
# Use the same settings for both variables
CFLAGS="${COMMON_FLAGS}"
CXXFLAGS="${COMMON_FLAGS}"
```
### MAKEOPTS
The MAKEOPTS variable defines how many parallel compilations should occur when installing a package.  
* Using a large number of jobs can significantly impact memory consumption. A good recommendation is to have at least 2 GiB of RAM for every job specified (so, e.g. -j6 requires at least 12 GiB). To avoid running out of memory, lower the number of jobs to fit the available memory.  
```bash
# If left undefined, Portage's default behavior is to set the MAKEOPTS value to the same number of threads returned by `nproc` 
MAKEOPTS="-j4"
```
### ACCEP_LICENSE and USE flags
In this stage I will add parameter to accept all licenses and not only thje free ones. Also I will set up couple USE variables.
```bash
ACCEPT_LICENSE="*"
USE="systemd X \
-elogind"
```
### Ready to go!
Update the /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/make.conf file to match personal preference and save (nano users would hit `Ctrl`+`o` to write the change and then `Ctrl`+`x` to quit).  
  
---
[Installing base system](https://github.com/Veliquu/Personal-linux/blob/main/Gentoo/Systemd/Installation/4.%20Installing%20base%20system.md)
