# [Chrooting](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Base)
## Selecting mirrors
### Distribution files
In order to download source code quickly it is recommended to select a fast mirror.  
Portage will look in the `make.conf` file for the GENTOO_MIRRORS variable and use the mirrors listed therein.   
Use `mirrorselect`to navigate to the mirrors of choice and press `Spacebar` to select one or more mirrors.
```bash
root # mirrorselect -i -o >> /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/make.conf
```
### Gentoo ebuild repository
Configuring the repository can be done in a few simple steps.  
 First, if it does not exist, create the `repos.conf` directory:  
 ```bash
 root # mkdir --parents /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/repos.conf
 ```
 Next, copy the Gentoo repository configuration file provided by Portage to the (newly created) `repos.conf` directory:
 ```bash
 root # cp /mnt/gentoo/usr/share/portage/config/repos.conf /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/repos.conf/gentoo.conf
 ```
 ## Copy DNS info
 One thing still remains to be done before entering the new environment and that is copying over the DNS information in `/etc/resolv.conf`.  
 This needs to be done to ensure that networking still works even after entering the new environment.  
 `/etc/resolv.conf` contains the name servers for the network.  
 ```bash
 root # cp --dereference /etc/resolv.conf /mnt/gentoo/etc/
 ```
 ## Mounting the necessary filesystems
 Get detailed view from [Gentoo handbook](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Base).  
 ```bash
root # mount --types proc /proc /mnt/gentoo/proc
root # mount --rbind /sys /mnt/gentoo/sys
root # mount --make-rslave /mnt/gentoo/sys
root # mount --rbind /dev /mnt/gentoo/dev
root # mount --make-rslave /mnt/gentoo/dev
root # mount --bind /run /mnt/gentoo/run
root # mount --make-slave /mnt/gentoo/run
```
* The `--make-rslave` operations are needed for systemd support later in the installation.

## Entering the new environment
This chrooting is done in three steps:  
1. The root location is changed from `/` (on the installation medium) to `/mnt/gentoo/` (on the partitions) using chroot
2. Some settings (those in `/etc/profile`) are reloaded in memory using the `source` command
3. The primary prompt is changed to help us remember that this session is inside a chroot environment.

```bash
root # chroot /mnt/gentoo /bin/bash
root # source /etc/profile
root # export PS1="(chroot) ${PS1}"
```
From this point, all actions performed are immediately on the new Gentoo Linux environment.  
  
### Mounting the boot partition
Now that the new environment has been entered, it is necessary to mount the boot partition.  
This will be important when it is time to compile the kernel and install the bootloader:
```bash
root # mount /dev/nvme0n1p1 /boot
```
# Configuring Portage
## Installing a Gentoo ebuild repository snapshot from the web
Next step is to install a snapshot of the Gentoo ebuild repository.  
This snapshot contains a collection of files that informs Portage about available software titles (for installation), which profiles the system administrator can select, package or profile specific news items, etc.  
  
This will fetch the latest snapshot (which is released on a daily basis) from one of Gentoo's mirrors and install it onto the system:
```bash
root # emerge-webrsync
```
## Updating the Gentoo ebuild repository
Suppose there is a need for the last package updates (up to 1 hour), then use `emerge --sync`.  
This command will use the rsync protocol to update the Gentoo ebuild repository (which was fetched earlier on through `emerge-webrsync`) to the latest state.
```bash
root # emerge --sync
```
## Reading news items
For the `news` module, three operations are most used:  
* With `list` an overview of the available news items is displayed.
* With `read` the news items can be read.
* With `purge` news items can be removed once they have been read and will not be reread anymore.

```bash
root # eselect news list
root # eselect news read
```
## Choosing the right profile
To see what profile the system is currently using, run eselect using the profile module:
```bash
root # eselect profile list
Available profile symlink targets:
  [1]   default/linux/amd64/17.1 *
  [2]   default/linux/amd64/17.1/desktop
  [3]   default/linux/amd64/17.1/desktop/gnome
  [4]   default/linux/amd64/17.1/desktop/kde
  ```
  * The output of the command is just an example and evolves over time.
  * When using systemd, please make sure the profile name contains systemd. Otherwise, please make sure the profile name does not contain systemd.

After viewing the available profiles for the amd64 architecture, users can select a different profile for the system:  
```bash
root # eselect profile set 2
```
## Updating the @world set
At this point, it is wise to update the system's `@world` set so that a base can be established.  
  
This following step is necessary so the system can apply any updates or USE flag changes which have appeared since the stage3 was built and from any profile selection:
```bash
root # emerge --ask --verbose --update --deep --newuse @world
```
## Configure USE variable and ACCEPT_LICENSE
You can read about these in more detail at [Gentoo handbook](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Base).  
