# [Configuring the Linux kernel](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Kernel)
## Installing firmware
```bash
root $ emerge --ask sys-kernel/linux-firmware
```
## /etc/mtab
Upstream only supports the `/etc/mtab` file being a symlink to `/proc/self/mounts`.  
Not creating this symlink will also cause problems with mount and df.
```bash
root $ ln -sf /proc/self/mounts /etc/mtab
```
## Installing the sources
Choose an appropriate kernel source and install it using emerge:
```bash 
root $ emerge --ask sys-kernel/gentoo-sources
```
This will install the Linux kernel sources in `/usr/src/` using the specific kernel version in the path.  
It is conventional for a `/usr/src/linux` symlink to be maintained, such that it refers to whichever sources correspond with the currently running kernel.   
However, this symbolic link will not be created by default. An easy way to create the symbolic link is to utilize eselect's kernel module.  
First, list all installed kernels:
```bash
root $ eselect kernel list
Available kernel symlink targets:
  [1]   linux-6.1.12-gentoo
  ```
In order to create a symbolic link called linux, use:
```bash
root $ eselect kernel set 1
```
```bash
root $ ls -l /usr/src/linux
lrwxrwxrwx    1 root   root    19 Feb 16 09:58 /usr/src/linux -> linux-6.1.12-gentoo
```

## Using genkernel
`genkernel` works by configuring a kernel nearly identically to the way the installation CD kernel is configured.  
First, emerge the `sys-kernel/genkernel` ebuild:
```bash 
root $ emerge --ask sys-kernel/genkernel
```
Next, edit the `/etc/fstab` file so that the line containing `/boot` as second field has the first field pointing to the right device.
```bash
root $ nano -w /etc/fstab
```
```bash
/dev/nvme0n1p1  /boot vfat  defaults  0 2
```
Now, compile the kernel sources by running `genkernel all`.  
Be aware though, as `genkernel` compiles a kernel that supports almost all hardware, this compilation will take quite a while to finish!
```bash
root $ genkernel all
```
Once genkernel completes, a kernel, full set of modules and initial ram disk (initramfs) will be created.  
Check that these are found:
```bash
root $ ls /boot/vmlinu* /boot/initramfs*
```
---
[Configuring the system]()
